everyone this is Laszlo Montgomery and
welcome to another episode of the China
history podcast not just any episode to
mark the occasion my 10 year anniversary
of being in this racket and presenting
the CHP to you I'm dredging up an old
topic produced back in 2010 a lot of
those earlier episodes like your humble
narrator could use a little work done on
them and this topic in particular well I
didn't do it justice all those years ago
and for the longest time I've been
saying I was gonna give this one a total
makeover and here it is for better or
for worse my deepest thanks to everyone
of you who have supported me all these
years many of you have been with me
since I hung out my shingle back in June
2010 and to everyone who just found the
CHP recently and gave it a shot and have
stuck around ever since again my eternal
thanks and appreciation for your support
and listenership as I'm recording this
in mid 2020 the air of the rat I think
it's safe to say us-china relations
have certainly seen better days years
before kovat 19 became a household word
well US and China we've absolutely run
each other through the wringer and made
a difficult period in world history and
much worse than I needed to be staring
out at the wreckage of this us-china
relationship and all the mutual
hostility spewed out both directions and
equal vileness that might lead anyone to
believe that it can't get any worse than
this although I've been saying that
since at least the end of 2018
so as we relive this history of those
exciting days from 1969 and 1972 let's
keep in mind both the US and China are
no strangers to bad relations we've been
here before and we bounce back as I'm
sure we'll bounce back again we worked
out our differences back in the early
1970s and believe me there was a heck of
a chasm that existed I'm sure I speak
for a lot of people in
hoping that our respective leaders and
everyone professionally politically are
spiritually committed to improving the
us-china relationship we'll come
together right now
there sure are enough mistakes and
miscalculations on both sides to
fulminate over and perhaps learn from so
without further ado the focus of this
episode is to look at the us-china
relationship during these years leading
up to the secret visit of dr. Henry
Kissinger in July 1971 and all the
back-channel discussions and drama that
led up to the so-called week that
changed the world in February 1972 it's
been 48 years since Richard M Nixon sat
down with Mao Zedong and symbolically
jump-started us-china friendly relations
I was 13 at the time and not interested
in politics yet but I certainly recall
when it happened and what a big
sensation it was that President Nixon
was going to read China the first
American president ever I grew up in the
Cold War days and China back then on the
news and in the public and political
discourse was called Red China and other
names but never the People's Republic
especially in US diplomatic circles we
showed them in this Internet age where
anyone within six feet of you was a
potential news reporter there's no way
Nixon or anyone could have pulled off
such a secret and traumatic coup in this
series I wanted to relive those moments
and show chronologically how events
unfolded also in this series I'd like to
interject my narrative with selections
of verbatim remarks from memos and
transcripts of meetings involving all
the key players in this great moment in
history a 2002 these formerly classified
top-secret transcripts to all the
meetings between the key players and the
American and Chinese sides everything
had been transcribed and was made
available to the public and I'm gonna
present several excerpts from these
historic meetings it's one thing to read
about the whole story
Nixon's visit to China but to hear the
four most important voices in their own
words articulate how this new
arrangement should work well it's quite
something as bad as things are right now
with us-china relations
actually there was a time when it was
much worse than this and I thought
before we begin our story in 1968 with
the election of Richard Nixon as the
37th president in the United States it
might not be a bad idea to go back to
the beginning and take a nice lugubrious
walk down memory lane and reminisce
about US PRC relations and how despite
the differences that kept us apart for
more than two decades mutual interests
finally brought us together at last as
we know for more than a few past CHP
episodes the US government and the
Chinese Communist Party going back to
the famous Dixie mission 1944 1947 well
although they talked and talked and
talked in the end we sided with the
Communist rival john kai-shek the
nationalist party the Republic of China
almost from the moment the nationalist
forces and finally Jiang himself
vacated the Chinese mainland the US and
China were at each other's throats
you think relations are tense today in
1950 we were going all-out to not make
it easy for the PRC government
established on October 1st 1949 we
immediately blocked all attempts to get
the PRC into the UN and to isolate them
internationally blocked China's rise was
an open secret the China seat continued
to be held by the Nationalist government
temporarily in exile on the island of
Taiwan off the coast of Fujian province
1950 started off with a bang our embassy
in Beijing was attacked and the vice
consul got roughed up not a good sign
McCarthyism
exploded onto the American scene and
then North Korea invaded South Korea and
the whole Korean War started and that
was just in the first six months of 1950
by the
of the year US forces were fighting
Chinese people's volunteer army troops
in the Korean winter PVA troops that
were led by none other than marshal
punto hawaii and we kept off that rotten
year and us-china relations by slapping
a trade embargo on China that didn't get
lifted for twenty-one years this oft
called forgotten war in Korea the
armistice was signed in July 1953 and
after blasting away at each other the
way they had over the past few years no
relations between the US and China
couldn't have been more frosty air you'd
think the US and China might want to try
and ratchet things down for a while but
as soon as the Korean War mop-up was
finished the US and China went at it
again over Taiwan Chinese military
started shelling the offshore islands of
cheating men and Matsu off the Fujian
coast but claimed and occupied by the
government in Taiwan at that time led by
our ally president Chiang kai-shek and
we signed the mutual defense treaty in
December 1954 with Chung and assured him
we had his back in the event that you
know who tried to invade Taiwan or
something along that line this event
that lasted September 3rd 1954 to May
1st 1955 became known as the first
Taiwan Straits crisis there were more
than one three years later they were at
it again and the remarks made by a US
Secretary of State John Foster Dulles
back in 1954 we're no less bellicose or
provocative than what Secretary Mike
Pompeo has said the present state of
us-china relations these times were
having now amid so much hatred and
animosity it's nothing new the times and
the historical circumstances are quite
different from today but what I'm saying
is we've been here before
well August 1955 things finally got so
bad Chinese and American diplomats
assisted with mutual go-betweens that
both sides found acceptable
having these meetings to see if the US
and PRC could throw each other a few
bones to let some steam escape from the
pressure cooker this was a year after
the Geneva Conference when John Foster
Dulles made his famous about-face on
premier Jo and lie they held these
initial ambassador real level talks in
Geneva in these chat sessions between
American and Chinese diplomats continued
on and off from 1955 until the moment
Henry Kissinger took over and began
talking to Jo and I personally some were
a 1958 more tension in the Taiwan Strait
with Uncle Sam shaking his fist in
China's direction saying they will
defend Taiwan this was the second time
on straights crisis August 23rd
September 22nd 1958 four weeks of each
side teaching the other a lesson and
then everyone returned to their corners
Great Leap Forward was going on in China
at this time so the PRC wasn't even ten
years old yet the USA was not making it
easy for them and though our actions
provided excellent fodder for the
communist propaganda machine to boil up
all this toxic congee for the masses and
I wasn't doing anything to help push the
two countries together to explore what
common interests that maybe possibly
existed between the two countries
then in April 1960 there was a faint
glimmer of light not much just something
that caught a lot of people's attention
China and Russia were already not on the
best of terms since Khrushchev gave the
secret speech On February 25th 1956
Georgia's 13th birthday American
officials were getting the sneaking
suspicion that the PRC and USSR were
having a major spat out in the open then
in the months that followed what was
that first speculation about what was
going on between these two neighbors
became very evident and in those final
years just before Beatlemania
the United States the first public
debate was beginning to heat up
regarding US policy towards China but on
June 18 1960 birthday of you-know-who
President Dwight t Eisenhower didn't
mince any words when he visited Taiwan
and declared quote the United States
does not recognize the claim of the
warlike and tyrannical communist regime
in Beijing to speak for all the Chinese
people in the United Nations we support
the Republic of China a founding member
as the only rightful representative of
China in that organ end quote yeah
president Trump wasn't the first sitting
US president to make the kinds of
hostile statements we've been hearing of
late Ike was a little more civil and
articulate but them was still fighting
words nonetheless by March 1961 our
ambassadors and diplomats were in Warsaw
holding discussions that were moving at
a predictable snail's pace these talks
first held in Geneva had a change of
venue on September 15 1958 and were
moved to the michellephan insky palace
and Warsaw
JFK's administration was still solidly
on Chiang kai-shek's side and there was
no indication that any changes in that
policy were even on the distant horizon
over in China well they weren't sitting
back and waiting for something to happen
once again in the summer of 1962 they
began shelling the offshore islands of
gentleman and Matsu and the US had its
third Taiwan Straits crisis on its hands
and the specter of a real invasion by
PRC troops who had amassed along the
Fujian Coast wasn't so far-fetched for
people in the know the official US
policy was that if China tried to invade
Taiwan the US would intervene and all
that that meant and if this didn't
ratchet tensions up enough a few months
later came the Cuban Missile Crisis we
all know how that played out yeah the
world was a dangerous place if you think
this mudslinging going on in
20 between the US and PRC is something
unprecedented think again us American
imperialists always made it easy for
China to rake us over the coals and much
of the propaganda churned out for the
lop eye Shing and China's friends in the
third world in August 1963 JFK had even
publicly called China quote the greatest
threat to peace since World War two and
quote by this time the sino-soviet split
was really starting to heat up and both
sides kept flinging the same old tired
bombastic and juvenile communist
rhetoric at each other US officials no
doubt felt a sense of self-satisfaction
watching this alliance start to circle
the toilet ball and hearing of reports
of Soviet citizens being roughed up on
the streets of Beijing but as 1964
dawned well we all know what happens now
and none of it's gonna be good for the
United States in the end August 7 1964
came the famous Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution and the Vietnam War was off
and running us-china relations were
gonna have to be back Bernhard for the
time being two months later on October
16 1964 China blew off their first
atomic bomb and in the process obtained
a measure of respectability national
pride and a chance to move the
geopolitical chess pieces around the
board a little as far as their position
and the global order went by March 1965
the first US troops started pouring into
South Vietnam and by the summer once
again for the second time since the
founding of the People's Republic
American and Chinese troops were
directly and indirectly firing on each
other on the battlefield there had even
been a case of US and Chinese Air Force
jets dueling over the South China Sea
so by 1965 the US and China were at war
with each other
well the following year the Chinese
nation took a few years off and Mao
launched the Cultural Revolution 1965 to
69 terrible years in China
besides the internal havoc and
destruction plaguing the country and
society the Soviets were amassing troops
along their southern border were at
Metzen jongen the Manchurian provinces
that's no doubt gave mile cause for
concern but just as China started to
lock down and begin their 10 years of
chaos funny things started to happen
over in the USA one by one politicians
started coming out and saying things to
the extent that you know we shouldn't
ignore the PRC indefinitely and at the
time had come to open a dialogue with
them this of course set off a very hotly
contested debate this was a subject that
a lot of people felt very strongly about
1960s for the very notion of cozying up
to communists and abandoning our friend
and Ally Taiwan and was a very sensitive
hot-button issue even the likes of
Edward M Kennedy and plenty of others
were making a lot of noise about a to
China solution in fact that seemed to be
a popular stopgap measure for a lot of
American politicians if you can't choose
one why not choose both have your cake
and eat it too
the to China solution many Americans
threw cold water on that idea and it
never gained much traction as a viable
solution and as far as the PRC and roc
were concerned they didn't want to hear
any of this and by the way neither to
LBJ as the u.s. got mired deeper and
deeper into the Vietnam War relations
between China and the Soviets started to
get more and more ugly and in June of
1967 when China tested its first h-bomb
three point three megatons that can do
some damage Leonid Brezhnev was surely
not happy to hear that news in a foreign
affairs article from October 1967 well
communists hater Richard M Nixon wrote a
piece that said US policy quote must
come urgently to grips with the reality
of China and that we cannot afford to
leave China forever outside the family
of Nations there to nurture its
fantasies cherish its hates and threaten
its neighbors end quote
Nixon wasn't alone in thinking this way
more and more politicians from both
political parties and not just in the
United States either began calling for
establishing relations with the PRC but
John kai-shek and the Republic of China
government on Taiwan still had a few
friends in Congress and in the executive
branch not to mention the US military
who watched their back and vowed to
counter any attempts within the
government to stab our allies in the
back and so with all this bad blood hurt
feelings and tortured history that had
come to define us-china relations since
1949 and even before that on August 8th
1968 after he had won the Republican
nomination for president Richard Nixon
declared he would quote extend the hand
of friendship to all people specifically
to the people of the People's Republic
of China end quote
well easier said than done the Vietnam
War was still raging and the Cultural
Revolution was ripping Chinese society
apart at the seams and the foul-tasting
communists flavored invective that the
Chinese Communist Party was so expert at
was still being flung in the direction
of the USA very much like today but
without the benefit of the internet on
the face of it this mutual enmity still
had plenty of mileage left in it the
People's Daily had a few choice words to
say about Nixon's overtures of peace in
a January 27 69 article that stated
quote although at the end of his rope
Nixon had the cheek to speak about the
future a man with one foot in the grave
tries to console himself by dreaming of
paradise
this is the delusion and writhing of a
dying class end quote and in February
1969 with a secret bombing campaign of
Cambodia started its four-year run
understood nothing to help bring the US
and China together Cambodia was one of
China's allies amidst all these bad
vibes and nasty talk on February 1st
1969 President Nixon sent a memo to his
national security adviser dr. Henry
Kissinger and instructed him to explore
ways to improve US PRC relations but he
added emphatically quote this of course
should be done privately and under no
circumstances get into the public prints
from this direction and quote and we
were off and running our story now
begins do yourself a favor and join me
next time in part two we'll pick up
early in the Nixon presidency and see
how both sides tiptoed through the
wreckage of the sino-american
relationship and how world events gave
both sides food for thought to come
together and give peace a chance until
that time this is Laszlo Montgomery
signing off from the city of Los Angeles
in America's most golden of states
begging you to join me next time for
another exciting special 10-year
anniversary episode of the China history
podcast